# RM-2-Programming-Assignment
# Project Overview
This repository contains the code and results for two sentiment classification models which are designed to assign 'positive' or 'negative' sentiment labels to text samples using a dataset of 36,548 Amazon product reviews. The first model (Model 1) is a logistic regression classifier; the second model (Model 2) is an encoder-only transformer classifier. All code was run on the University of Manchester Computational Shared Facility (CSF). 
# Structure of Repository
The repository is organised into the following files:
- main.py ~ contains the code used to train and evaluate both models.
- slurm.sh ~ contains the execution logic for running the main.py file on the CSF.
- experiment_results.txt ~ contains the execution log for main.py. This includes per-epoch training statistics and final AUC scores for both models, as well as a p-value generated via bootstrapping, to compare the statistical significance of the difference between the two AUC scores.
- requirements.txt ~ contains all dependencies required to reproduce the environment for main.py.
# Data 
The data for this project can be downloaded using the following link:
[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cbannard/lela60331_24-25/refs/heads/main/coursework/Compiled_Reviews.txt](url)

The data was divided into training, development and test sets using an 80/10/10 split and both models utilised the same data splits. 
# Models
Both models make use of pre-trained 'GoogleNews' word2vec embeddings which can be downloaded using the following link:
[https://github.com/mmihaltz/word2vec-GoogleNews-vectors/raw/master/GoogleNews-vectors-negative300.bin.gz](url)

Model 1 uses the input embeddings directly for classification. 

Model 2 processes the embeddings through a more complex architecture, which incorporates learned positional embeddings to provide sequential information. The core architecture consists of two stacked transformer encoder layers. Each layer is comprised of:
- Multi-head attention
- Layer normalization and dropout (0.1)
- A 2-layer MLP with ReLU activation

As a result of this architecture, inputs to this model were truncated to a sequence length of 512 tokens. The model's outputs are generated by a classification head which uses masked global mean pooling to project hidden states into class logits.

# Results and Evaluation
Both model's training logic implements early stopping, using the development set to track a 'best accuracy' score and stop training after 5 epochs of no improvement. These scores are shown below:
- Model 1: 76.22% (90 epochs)
- Model 2: 82.54% (24 epochs)

AUC scores were generated using the test sets for both models: 
- Model 1: 0.8457
- Model 2: 0.9093

P-value: < 0.0001

The p-value represents the statistical significance of the difference between the AUC scores. This indicates that Model 2 provides a statistically significant improvement in its ability to discriminate between the positive and negative sentiment of the text samples. This superior performance (a ~6% increase in AUC) suggests that capturing sequential information and inter-token relationships is highly beneficial for sentiment analysis compared to the linear baseline.

# Running the Code 
The code was executed using the slurm.sh file on the CSF inside a virtual environment. The virtual environment used Python 3.13.1 and all dependencies were installed inside this environment using the requirements.txt file. Total run time was approximately 25 minutes. The experiment's results were verified for reproducibility; subsequent runs yielded identical AUC scores and p-values to four decimal places. 
